--- page 1 ---
AutoTutor’s Coverage of Expectations during Tutorial Dialogue 
Art Graesser, Andrew Olney, Matthew Ventura, and G. Tanner Jackson 
 
Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN  38152 
a-graesser@memphis.edu, aolney@memphis.edu, mventura@memphis.edu, gtjacksn@memphis.edu  
 
Abstract 
AutoTutor is a learning environment with an animated agent 
that tutors students by holding a conversation in natural 
language.  AutoTutor presents challenging questions and 
then engages in mixed initiative dialogue that guides the 
student in building an answer.  AutoTutor uses latent 
semantic analysis (LSA) as a major component that 
statistically represents world knowledge and tracks whether 
particular expectations and misconceptions are expressed by 
the learner.  This paper describes AutoTutor, reports some 
analyses on the adequacy of the LSA component, and 
proposes some improvements in computing the coverage of 
particular expectations and misconceptions. 
Tutorial Dialogue with AutoTutor   
AutoTutor is a computer tutor that holds conversations 
with learners in natural language (Graesser et al. 2004; 
Graesser, Person, & Harter 2001; Graesser, VanLehn, 
Rose, Jordan, & Harter 2001).  AutoTutor simulates the 
discourse patterns of human tutors and is augmented with a 
number of ideal tutoring strategies.  The tutor presents a 
series of challenging questions from a curriculum script 
and engages in a collaborative mixed initiative dialog 
while constructing answers.  AutoTutor was designed to be 
a good conversational partner that comprehends, speaks, 
points, and displays emotions, all in a coordinated fashion. 
AutoTutor “speaks” by utilizing a speech engine developed 
at Microsoft (www.microsoft.com/products/msagent) or 
SpeechWorks (www.speechworks.com).  For some topics 
and versions of AutoTutor, there are graphical displays, 
animations of causal mechanisms, or interactive simulation 
environments, with AutoTutor talking about and pointing 
to various components (Graesser, Chipman, Haynes, & 
Olney, in press).  The initial versions of AutoTutor were on 
the topic of computer literacy.  A later version, called 
Why/AutoTutor, helps college students learn Newtonian 
physics (Graesser, VanLehn et al. 2001) by asking them 
why-questions on difficult problems.   
    There are a number of distinctive features of AutoTutor 
that set it apart from most other intelligent tutoring 
systems.  One strength of AutoTutor is that the tutoring 
domain can be changed quickly with lesson authoring 
tools, without the need to rebuild any of the conversational 
or pedagogical components of the system. A second 
strength is that the dialogue quality is sufficiently robust 
                                                 
Copyright © 2005, American Association for Artificial Intelligence  
 (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 
that bystander evaluators cannot tell the difference between 
a speech act generated by AutoTutor and a speech act 
generated by a human tutor; such bystander Turing tests 
have been reported in several experiments by Person and 
Graesser (2002).  A third strength is that AutoTutor shows 
impressive learning gains of nearly a letter grade 
improvement compared with pretest measures and suitable 
comparison conditions (Graesser et al. 2003; Graesser, Lu 
et al. 2004; VanLehn, Graesser et al. 2004).   A fourth 
strength is that AutoTutor uses a hybrid of structured 
knowledge representations and a statistical representation 
of world knowledge called Latent Semantic Analysis 
(LSA, Landauer, Folts, & Laham 1998; Graesser et al. 
2000).  It is this LSA component that will be examined in 
the present article. 
Specific Goals and Scope of AutoTutor 
AutoTutor presents a series of difficult questions to be 
answered, or problems to be solved.  An answer to a 
typical question is 3-7 sentences, or approximately a 
paragraph of information.  When students are asked 
questions that require paragraph-length answers and deep 
reasoning, initial answers to these questions are typically 
only 1 or 2 sentences in length.  AutoTutor helps the 
student fill in missing pieces of the answer by managing a 
mixed initiative dialogue with different categories of 
dialogue acts. AutoTutor provides feedback to the student 
on what the student types in (positive, neutral, or negative 
feedback), pumps the student for more information (“What 
else?”), prompts the student to fill in missing words, gives 
the student hints, fills in missing information  with 
assertions, identifies and corrects erroneous ideas and 
misconceptions, answers the student’s questions, and 
summarizes answers.  These dialogue acts of feedback, 
pumps, prompts, hints, assertions, corrections, answers, 
and summaries eventually lead to a full correct answer. 
    The tutorial dialog patterns of AutoTutor were motivated 
by research in discourse processing, cognitive science, and 
intelligent tutoring systems.  Constructivist theories of 
learning emphasize the importance of learners actively 
constructing explanations (Aleven & Koedinger 2002; Chi, 
de Leeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher 1994; McNamara 2004).  
Researchers have developed intelligent tutoring systems 
that adaptively respond to the learner’s knowledge and 
help construct explanations (Anderson Corbett, Koedinger, 
& Pelletier 1995; VanLehn et al. 2003).  Empirical 
research in discourse processing has documented the 


--- page 2 ---
collaborative constructive activities that frequently occur 
during human tutoring (Chi, Siler, Jeong, Yamauchi, & 
Hausmann 2001; Fox 1993; Graesser, Person, & Magliano 
1995).   
    Surprisingly, the dialog moves of most human tutors are 
not particularly sophisticated from the standpoint of 
today’s pedagogical theories and intelligent tutoring 
systems.  Human tutors rarely implement bona fide 
Socratic tutoring strategies, modeling-scaffolding-fading, 
reciprocal training, building on prerequisites, and other 
sophisticated pedagogical techniques.  Instead, human 
tutors normally coach the student by filling in missing 
pieces of information in an expected answer and by fixing 
bugs and misconceptions expressed by the student.  We 
refer to this tutoring mechanism as Expectation and 
Misconception Tailored Dialog.  AutoTutor was designed 
to simulate the dialog moves of human tutors who coach 
students in constructing explanations and answers to open-
ended questions.   
A Concrete Example of AutoTutor 
AutoTutor’s curriculum script consists of a set of questions 
(or problems) and answers that require deep reasoning.   
Listed below are the important forms of content affiliated 
with each main question. 
 
Main Question.  If a lightweight car and a massive truck 
have a head-on collision, upon which vehicle is the impact 
force greater?  Which vehicle undergoes the greater change 
in its motion? Explain why. 
 
Ideal Answer.  The force of impact on each of the 
colliding bodies is due to interaction between them. The 
forces experienced by these bodies are thus an 
action/reaction pair. Thus, in terms of Newton's third law 
of motion, these forces will be equal in magnitude and 
opposite in direction. The magnitude of the acceleration 
produced by a force on different objects is inversely 
proportional to their masses.  Hence, the magnitude of the 
car's acceleration due to the force of impact will be much 
larger than that of the more massive truck. A larger 
magnitude of acceleration implies a larger rate of change of 
velocity, which may be interpreted as greater change in 
motion. Therefore, the car undergoes greater change in its 
motion. 
 
Expectations.   
 (E1) The magnitudes of the forces exerted by the two 
objects on each other are equal. 
(E2) If one object exerts a force on a second object, then 
the second object exerts a force on the first object in the 
opposite direction.  
(E3) The same force will produce a larger acceleration in a 
less massive object than a more massive object. 
 
Misconceptions.    
(M1) A lighter/smaller object exerts no force on a 
heavier/larger object. 
(M2) A lighter/smaller object exerts less force on other 
objects than a heavier/larger object. 
(M3) The force acting on a body is dependent on the mass 
of the body. 
(M4) Heavier objects accelerate faster for the same force 
than lighter objects. 
(M5) Action and reaction forces do not have the same 
magnitude. 
 
Functionally Equivalent Concepts. 
car, vehicle, object 
truck, vehicle, object 
 
    The learner might possibly articulate the ideal answer to 
this question, but such a complete answer rarely if ever 
occurs.  Natural language is much too imprecise, 
fragmentary, vague, ungrammatical, and elliptical to 
anticipate such semantically well-formed and complete 
responses.  LSA is used to evaluate, probabilistically, the 
extent to which the information within the student turns 
(i.e., an individual turn, a combination of turns, or 
collective sequence of turns) matches the ideal answer.  
AutoTutor requires that the learner articulate each of the 
expectations before it considers the question answered.  
The system periodically identifies a missing expectation 
during the course of the dialogue and posts the goal of 
covering the expectation.  When expectation E is missed 
and therefore posted, AutoTutor attempts to get the student 
to articulate it by generating hints and prompts that 
encourage the learners to fill in missing content words and 
propositions.  Expectation E is considered covered if the 
content of the learners’ turns meet or exceed a threshold T 
in its LSA cosine value.  More specifically, E is scored as 
covered if the cosine match between E and the student 
input I is high enough: cosine (E, I) ≥ T.  The threshold has 
varied between .40 and .75 in previous versions and 
evaluations of AutoTutor.   
    Each expectation E has a family of prompts and hints 
that potentially may be recruited in AutoTutor’s dialogue 
acts in order to get the student to fill in every content word 
and proposition in E.  A particular prompt or hint from the 
family is selected to maximize an increase in the LSA 
cosine match score when the prompt or hint is expressed 
by the learner.  Students may express a misconception 
during the dialogue.  This happens when the student input I 
matches a misconception M with a sufficiently high match 
score. AutoTutor corrects the misconception and goes on.    
    AutoTutor systematically manages the dialogue when it 
attempts to get the learner to articulate an expectation E 
that gets posted.  AutoTutor stays on topic by completing 
the sub-dialog that covers expectation E before starting a 
sub-dialog on another expectation. Learners often leave out 
a content word, phrase, or entire clause within E.  As 


--- page 3 ---
already mentioned, specific prompts and hints are selected 
that maximize the learner’s filling in this content and 
boosting the match score above threshold.  Suppose, for 
example, that expectation E1 needs to be articulated in the 
answer.  The following family of candidate prompts is 
available for selection by AutoTutor to encourage the 
student to articulate particular content words in expectation 
E1. 
 
(a) 
The magnitudes of the forces exerted by two 
objects on each other are ____. 
(b) 
The magnitudes of forces are equal for the two 
______. 
(c) 
The two vehicles exert on each other an equal 
magnitude of _____. 
(d) 
The force of the two vehicles on each other are 
equal in _____. 
 
If the student fails to articulate one of the four content 
words (equal, objects, force, magnitude), then AutoTutor 
selects the corresponding prompt (a, b, c, and d, 
respectively).   
    LSA plays a critical role in AutoTutor in several 
respects.  LSA serves as a conceptual pattern matcher as it 
constantly is comparing learner input to expectations and 
misconceptions.  It provides a quantitative metric for 
evaluating the extent to which any two bags of words meet 
or exceed a threshold criterion.  LSA is a statistical metric 
for performing pattern recognition, pattern matching, and 
pattern completion operations.  The fidelity of the LSA 
component needs to be carefully evaluated in light of its 
central role in AutoTutor. 
LSA-based Metrics that Evaluate the 
Coverage of Expectations and Misconceptions  
This section reports some of the analyses that we have 
conducted in our evaluations of the extent to which LSA 
accurately 
assesses 
coverage 
of 
expectations 
and 
misconceptions.  We have considered different units of 
analysis, spans of text, and algorithms in these 
assessments.  These assessments of LSA have been 
conducted on the topics of computer science (Graesser, 
P.Wiemer-Hastings, K. Wiemer-Hastings, Person, & 
Harter 2000; P. Wiemer-Hastings, K. Wiemer-Hastings, & 
Graesser 1999) and Newtonian physics (Olde, Karnavat, 
Franceschetti, & Graesser 2002). 
    An LSA space requires a corpus of training texts, so a 
few words should be said about the corpora we used for 
AutoTutor.  The versions of AutoTutor for computer 
literacy covered the topics of hardware, operating systems, 
and the Internet.  The corpus consisted of a textbook on 
computer literacy, the curriculum script, and 30 articles, 
namely 10 for each of the three topics.  The version of 
AutoTutor for physics consisted of the curriculum script, a 
textbook written by Hewitt (1998), and 10 articles on 
Newtonian physics.  We used 300 dimensions in the LSA 
space for all of these tutors.  It should be noted that the 
performance of LSA did not improve much when we 
sanitized the corpus by including only relevant documents 
and content (Olde et al. 2002), but we would expect 
performance to noticeably improve with a corpus that is 3-
4 times the current size.   
Evaluating Answer Essays 
One of the performance assessments of AutoTutor is an 
essay test that is administered before and after AutoTutor 
training.  The essays consist of students answering 
qualitative physics questions on their own, without any 
assistance.  The major research question is how well LSA 
fares in grading these essays.  Automated essay graders 
have adopted LSA metrics (Foltz, Gilliam, & Kendall 
2000), so we pursued a similar assessment for AutoTutor.  
The standard approach is to compare LSA-based grades of 
essays with essay quality ratings of subject matter experts.   
    We have we asked experts in physics or computer 
literacy to make judgments about the overall quality of the 
student essays.   An expert’s quality rating was 
operationally defined as the proportion of expectations in 
an essay that judges believed were covered (using criteria 
that vary from stringent to lenient). Similarly, LSA was 
used to compute the proportion of expectations covered, 
using varying thresholds of match scores on whether 
information in the student essay covered each expectation.  
Correlations between the LSA scores and the judges’ 
quality ratings (i.e., the mean rating across judges) were 
approximately .50 for both conceptual physics (Olde et al. 
2002) and computer literacy (Graesser et al. 2000; P. 
Wiemer-Hastings et al. 1999).  Correlations have generally 
increased as the length of the text increases, yielding 
correlations of .73 or higher in other laboratories (Foltz et 
al. 2000).  We believe that our LSA-based assessments 
would exceed the .50 correlation if the answers had more 
words and the corpus was much larger.  It is informative to 
note that the correlations between a pair of experts in our 
studies was approximately .65, so LSA agrees with experts 
approximately as good as experts agree with each other.     
User Modeling During AutoTutor Training 
As students contribute information, turn by turn, their 
content 
is 
compared 
with 
the 
expectations 
and 
misconceptions in the curriculum script.  How well does 
LSA perform this user modeling?  We have performed 
some analyses on the LSA cosine scores in AutoTutor’s 
log files in order to answer this question.   
    In one analysis of conceptual physics, pretest scores on a 
multiple choice test served as the gold standard of the 
students’ pre-experimental knowledge of physics before 
they started the AutoTutor training.  The multiple choice 
test was similar to a frequently used test developed by 


--- page 4 ---
Hestenes, Wells, and Swackhamer (1992), called the Force 
Concept Inventory.  If AutoTutor is performing effective 
user modeling, then the dialogue moves selected by 
AutoTutor should be systematically affected by the 
students’ prior knowledge of physics.  This indeed was the 
case when we analyzed the dialogue moves (Jackson, 
Mathews, Lin, & Graesser 2004).  
    Consider first the short feedback that AutoTutor gives to 
the student after most of the student’s turns.  The students’ 
physics knowledge has a significant positive correlation 
with proportion of short feedbacks that were positive and a 
negative correlation with negative feedback.  Next consider 
the corrections that AutoTutor made when identifying 
student errors and misconceptions.  There was a negative 
correlation between student knowledge and the number of 
misconceptions identified by AutoTutor.   Consider finally 
the three dialogue move categories that attempt to cover 
the content of the expectations in the curriculum script:  
Hints, prompts, and assertions.  There is a continuum from 
the student supplying information to the tutor supplying 
information as we move from hints, to prompts, to 
assertions.  The correlations with student knowledge 
reflected this continuum perfectly, with correlations being 
positive for hints and negative for assertions.  For students 
with more knowledge of physics, all AutoTutor needs to do 
is pump and hint, thereby nudging the student to articulate 
the expectations.  For students with less knowledge of 
physics, AutoTutor needs to generate prompts for specific 
words or to assert the correct information, thereby 
extracting knowledge piecemeal or telling the student the 
correct information.   These results support the claim that 
AutoTutor performs user modeling with some modicum of 
accuracy; the system adaptively responds to the learner’s 
level of knowledge. 
 
Coverage Characteristics Curves.  A different approach 
to assessing user modeling is by analyzing the evolution of 
answers to the main questions.  As the student contributes 
information, turn, by turn, the LSA coverage scores should 
increase.  Coverage characteristics curves (CC-curves) 
were prepared in order to assess whether this is the case.  A 
CC-curve is the LSA score for an expectation E plotted as 
a function of conversational turns or as a function of 
particular states in the evolution of the answer.  For 
example, Graesser et al. (2000) reported CC-curves for 
computer literacy by plotting mean cumulative LSA cosine 
scores for each expectation as a function of conversational 
turns.  The scores were cumulative in the sense that the 
student’s content in turn N+1 includes all of the content 
articulated by the student in turns 1 through N.  The mean 
LSA scores were .27, .39, .45, .62, .66, and .76 for turns 1, 
2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, respectively.  These data support the claim 
that LSA adequately tracks the evolving evolution of a 
correct answer over conversational turns. 
    We prepared some CC-curves for one of our recent 
experiments on physics.  We identified the total set of 
dialogue sequences in which the student had trouble 
articulating a particular expectation E.  The LSA coverage 
score for E was recorded at 5 points: (a) after the question 
was first asked and AutoTutor pumped the student for 
information for one turn, (b) a first hint was given, (c) a 
first prompt was given (always after a first hint), (d) a 
second hint was given, and (e) a second prompt was given 
(always after the second hint).  Figure 1 plots the mean 
LSA scores as a function of these five states in the 
dialogue history for an expectation E.  As can be seen in 
Figure 1, there is a monotonic increase in LSA values over 
turns.  The values are also higher for students with high 
than low pre-experimental knowledge about physics. 
Therefore, AutoTutor’s LSA component provides a valid 
metric for tracking the coverage of an expectation over the 
tutorial dialogue.   
 
Figure 1.   Relationship between LSA cosine and number of 
student contributions in AutoTutor’s physics tutor. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Matching 
Sentential 
Expectations 
to 
Learners’ 
Sentential Contributions.  An expert physicist rated the 
degree to which particular speech acts expressed during 
AutoTutor training matched particular expectations.  These 
judgments were made on a sample of 25 physics 
expectations (sentence-length units, such as E1 through 
E5) and 5 randomly sampled student turns per expectation, 
yielding a total of 125 pairs of expressions.  The learner 
turns were always responses to the first hint for that 
expectation.  The question is how well the expert ratings 
correlate with LSA coverage scores.   
    The correlation between an expert judge’s rating and the 
LSA cosine was modest, only r = .29.  We scaled the 125 
items on two other scales, to see how they would compare 
with LSA.  First, we computed overlap scores between the 
words in the two sentential units (minus a, an, the).  If an 
expectation has A content words, a student speech act has 
B content words, and there are C common words between 
the two sentential units, then the overlap score is computed 
as [2C/(A+B)].  The correlation between expert ratings and 
word overlap scores was r = .39.  So a simple word overlap 
metric does a somewhat better job than LSA per se when 
sentential units are compared.  Second, we scaled whether 
the serial order of common content words was similar 
between the two sentential units by computing Kendall’s 
Tau scores.  This word-order similarity metric had a .25 
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
T ur n  1
H i n t - 1
P r o m pt - 1
H i n t - 2
P r o m p t - 2
LSA cosine
High knowledge student
Low knowledge student


--- page 5 ---
correlation with the expert ratings. We performed a 
multiple regression analysis that assessed whether the 
expert ratings could be predicted by LSA, word overlap, 
and Kendall’s Tau together.  The three predictors 
accounted for a significant r = .42.  These results support 
the conclusion that analyses of sentences would benefit 
from a hybrid computational algorithm that considers both 
LSA and alternative algorithms.  Alternative algorithms 
would consider (a) associates of the content words 
computed as nearest neighbors in the LSA space (Kintsch 
2001), (b) word combinations in the actual corpus (Ventura 
et al. 2004), and (c) word sequences.  A hybrid model 
between LSA and symbolic models of syntax and meaning 
would be a sensible research direction. 
What Expectations are LSA-worthy? 
It is conceivable that some expectations are more amenable 
to LSA computations than others.  For example, 
expectations that have high frequency words should have 
poorer performance because there would not be enough 
distinctive content.  Ideally, AutoTutor would have a 
principled way of determining whether or not an 
expectation is LSA-worthy.  An expectation is defined as 
LSA-worthy if there is a high correlation between LSA and 
human experts in its being covered in essays or the training 
history.  If AutoTutor could predict the LSA worthiness of 
an expectation in a principled way, then that could guide 
whether it trusted the LSA metrics.  LSA metrics would be 
used for expectations that are LSA-worthy, but other 
algorithms would be used for expectations that are not 
LSA-worthy.    
    We computed LSA-worthiness scores for approximately 
40 expectations associated with the physics problems that 
were used in the pretest and posttest essays.  The LSA 
worthiness score for expectation E is simply a correlation 
between (a) the LSA coverage scores for E on a sample of 
essays and (b) the mean expectation coverage rating among 
5 expert judges.  These judges score whether any given 
expectation E was present in a particular essay in the 
sample. The correlation score between (a) and (b) should 
approach 1.0 to the extent an expectation is LSA-worthy.  
Some examples of these scores are listed for 4 of the 
expectations. 
 
After the release, the only force on the balls is the force 
of the moon’s gravity (r = .71) 
A larger object will experience a smaller acceleration 
for the same force (r = .12) 
Force equals mass times acceleration (r = .67) 
The boxes are in free fall (r = .21) 
 
The first and third of these expectations would be 
considered LSA-worthy, but not the second and fourth.  It 
is fortunate that the third expectation is LSA-worthy 
because it captures Newton’s second law.   
    We performed some analyses that assessed whether 
there were linguistic or conceptual properties of the 
expectations that would correlate with the LSA-worthiness 
scores.  If there are, we would have a principled way for 
AutoTutor to gauge whether the LSA assessments can be 
trusted.  We have examined dozens of linguistic and 
conceptual properties of the expectations, but only two of 
them 
significantly 
correlated 
with 
LSA-worthiness:  
Number of infrequent words (r = .23) and negations (r = -
.29).  Among the other properties that had near-zero 
correlations were number of words, content words, 
glossary terms, relative terms (e.g., small, fast), quantifiers 
(e.g., some, all, one, two), deictic expressions (e.g., this, 
that), and vector length.  These modest correlations suggest 
it may be difficult to predict a priori which of the 
expectations will end up being LSA-worthy. 
Conclusions about LSA 
We are convinced that LSA has been moderately 
successful as a foundational representational system for 
AutoTutor.  It was capable of grading essays in physics 
and computer literacy (r = .5), almost as well as experts.  It 
could significantly perform user modeling and track the 
coverage of expectations during the evolution of 
collaborative dialogue.  Sentence unit matches with LSA 
are limited (r = .3), however, so it is important to consider 
explicit word overlap and ordering of words when 
sentential units are compared.  We know that some 
expectations can be reliably computed with LSA, but 
others cannot be and will require more hybrid architectures 
for conceptual pattern matching.  We will explore some 
theoretically principled hybrid models in our quest for an 
adequate sentential pattern matcher.    
Acknowledgements 
The 
Tutoring 
Research 
Group 
(TRG) 
is 
an 
interdisciplinary 
research 
team 
comprised 
of 
approximately 35 researchers from psychology, computer 
science, 
physics, 
and 
education 
(visit 
http://www.autotutor.org). The research on AutoTutor was 
supported by the National Science Foundation and the 
Department of Defense Multidisciplinary University 
Research Initiative administered by the Office of Naval 
Research. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or 
recommendations expressed in this material are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of 
DoD, ONR, or NSF.   
References 
Aleven, V., & Koedinger, K. R. 2002. An effective 
metacognitive strategy: Learning by doing and explaining 
with a computer-based Cognitive Tutor. Cognitive Science 
26:147-179. 


--- page 6 ---
Anderson, J. R., Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., & 
Pelletier, R. 1995. Cognitive tutors: Lessons learned. The 
Journal of the Learning Sciences 4:167-207. 
Chi, M.T.H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M. & LaVancher, C. 
1994. Eliciting self-explanation improves understanding. 
Cognitive Science 18:439-477. 
Chi, M. T. H., Siler, S., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., & 
Hausmann, R. G. 2001. Learning from human tutoring. 
Cognitive Science 25:471-533. 
Foltz, P.W., Gilliam, S., & Kendall, S. 2000.  Supporting 
content-based feedback in on-line writing evaluation with 
LSA.  Interactive Learning Environments 8:111-127.   
Fox, B. 1993.  The human tutorial dialog project.  
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Graesser, A.C., Chipman, P., Haynes, B.C., & Olney, A. 
2004.  AutoTutor: An intelligent tutoring system with 
mixed-initiative 
dialogue. 
 
Submitted 
to 
IEEE 
Transactions on Learning.   
Graesser, A.C., Hu, X., Person, P., Jackson, T., and Toth, J 
2004. Modules and information retrieval facilities of the 
Human Use Regulatory Affairs Advisor (HURAA).  
International Journal on eLearning.  Forthcoming. 
Graesser, A.C., Lu, S., Jackson, G.T., Mitchell, H., 
Ventura, M., Olney, A., & Louwerse, M.M. 2004.  
AutoTutor: A tutor with dialogue in natural language.  
Behavioral 
Research 
Methods, 
Instruments, 
and 
Computers.  Forthcoming. 
Graesser, A.C., Person, N., Harter, D., & the TRG 2001.  
Teaching tactics and dialog in AutoTutor.  International 
Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 12:257-279. 
Graesser, A. C., Person, N. K., & Magliano, J. P. 1995. 
Collaborative dialogue patterns in naturalistic one-to-one 
tutoring. Applied Cognitive Psychology 9:1-28. 
Graesser, A.C., VanLehn, K., Rose, C., Jordan, P., & 
Harter, D. 2001.  Intelligent tutoring systems with 
conversational dialogue.  AI Magazine 22(3):39-51.  
Graesser, A.C., Wiemer-Hastings, K., Wiemer-Hastings, 
P., Kreuz, R., & the TRG 1999. Auto Tutor: A simulation 
of a human tutor. Journal of Cognitive Systems Research 
1:35-51. 
Graesser, A.C., Wiemer-Hastings, P., Wiemer-Hastings, 
K., Harter, D., Person, N., and the TRG 2000.  Using latent 
semantic analysis to evaluate the contributions of students 
in AutoTutor.  Interactive Learning Environments 8:129-
148.   
Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhamer, G. 1992. Force 
Concept Inventory. The Physics Teacher 30:141-158. 
Hewitt, P. G. 1987. Conceptual Physics. Menlo Park, CA: 
Addison-Wesley. 
Hume, G. D., Michael, J.A., Rovick, A., & Evens, M. W. 
1996.  Hinting as a tactic in one-on-one tutoring.  The 
Journal of the Learning Sciences 5:23-47.   
Jackson, G.T., Mathews, E.C., Lin, D., Graesser, A.C. 
2003. Modeling student performance to enhance the 
pedagogy of AutoTutor. In P. Brusilovsky, A. Corbett, and 
F. de Rosis (Eds.), Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence: 
2702, 368-372. New York: Springer. 
Jurafsky, D., & Martin, J.H. 2000. Speech and language 
processing: 
An 
introduction 
to 
natural 
language 
processing, 
computational 
linguistics, 
and 
speech 
recognition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.   
Kintsch, W. 2001. Predication. Cognitive Science 25:173-
202. 
Landauer, T.K., & Dumais, S.T. 1997.  A solution to 
Plato’s problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis theory of 
the 
acquisition, 
induction, 
and 
representation 
of 
knowledge.  Psychological Review 104:211-240.   
Landauer, T.K., Foltz, P.W., Laham, D. 1998.  An 
introduction to latent semantic analysis.  Discourse 
Processes 25:259-284.   
McNamara, D.S. 2004. SERT: Self-explanation reading 
training.  Discourse Processes 38:1-30. 
Olde, B. A., Franceschetti, D.R., Karnavat, Graesser, A. C. 
& the TRG 2002. The right stuff: Do you need to sanitize 
your corpus when using latent semantic analysis?  In W. 
Gray and C. Schunn Eds.), Proceedings of the 24th Annual 
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 708-713.  
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Penumatsa, P., Ventura, M., Graesser, A.C., Franceschetti, 
D.R., Louwerse, M., Hu, X., Cai, Z., & the TRG 2004.  
The right threshold value: What is the right threshold of 
cosine measure when using latent semantic analysis for 
evaluating student answers?  International Journal of 
Artificial Intelligence Tools.  Forthcoming. 
Person, N. K., Graesser, A. C., & the TRG 2002.  Human 
or computer? AutoTutor in a bystander Turing test.  In S. 
A. Cerri, G. Gouarderes, & F. Paraguacu (Eds.), 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on 
Intelligent Tutoring Systems, 821-830. Berlin: Springer.   
VanLehn, K., Graesser, A.C., Jackson, G.T., Jordan, P., 
Olney, A., & Rosé, C.P. 2004.  Natural language tutoring: 
A comparison of human tutors, computer tutors and text.  
Submitted to Cognitive Science. 
VanLehn, K., Jordan, P., Rosé, C. P., Bhembe, D., Bottner, 
M., Gaydos, A., et al. 2002. The architecture of Why2-
Atlas: A coach for qualitative physics essay writing. In 
S.A. Cerri, G. Gouarderes, & F. Paraguacu (Eds.), 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on 
Intelligent Tutoring, 158-167. Berlin: Springer – Verlag. 
Ventura, M., Hu, X., Graesser, A., Louwerse, M., & Olney, 
A. 2004. The context dependent sentence abstraction 
model.  In K. D. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), 
Proceedings of the 26rd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive 
Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Forthcoming. 
Wiemer-Hastings, P., Wiemer-Hastings, K., and Graesser, 
A. 1999.  Improving an intelligent tutor's comprehension of 
students with Latent Semantic Analysis. In S.P. Lajoie and 
M. Vivet, Artificial Intelligence in Education, 535-542.  
Amsterdam: IOS Press.  
